So why would we choose to use 3D medical images over 2D?
Often, these studies are better at telling us,
is there a finding of interest?
If so, where is it precisely?
Often, we can use the findings imaging characteristics to
determine what it is or at least have a short differential diagnosis.
To achieve these advantages,
we need to think critically about what imaging modality we want to
use for a given patient and their suspected condition.
Factors to take into account would include contrast resolution, spatial resolution,
both important terms I will define shortly,
invasiveness of the study,
radiation dose from modalities which use ionizing radiation,
and often, cost has to be taken into account.
Let's go over the terms contrast and spacial resolution in more detail.
First, contrast resolution.
Contrast resolution refers to the ability of
an imaging modality to distinguish between differences in image intensity.
Practically speaking, this comes down to choosing the right imaging modality to have
the tissue or condition of interest stand out from the background normal tissue.
Some modalities work better for certain diseases
and the appropriate modality choice is very context-driven.
Here's a concrete example.
In this patient, the finding of concern is an area of injured brain tissue from a stroke.
On the CT, we see several dark areas,
which to the trained eye can be picked up,
though in more subtle cases,
can be very hard to distinguish against the background of normal brain.
Now, compare this appearance to
the MRI diffusion-weighted sequence and we can
see that the areas of injury light up like a light bulb,
such that even a non-trained observer could see that there's a difference
between the normal and damaged tissue in terms of voxel intensity.
To recap, each imaging modality has its own intrinsic contrast resolution,
which can be adjusted by tweaking certain imaging parameters prior to image acquisition.
However, we can further modify
signal intensities between different tissues by the use of contrast media,
also known as a contrast agent.
Note that these terms can be confusing because they both contain the term contrast.
Contrast resolution talks about a perimeter intrinsic to the imaging modality.
Contrast media, or contrast agent, on the other hand,
are a substance that are given to the patient most often intravenously or orally,
which stands out against the background tissue.
Tissues differ in their rate of contrast media uptake and whichever ones take up
the substance most avidly stand out most clearly against the tissues that don't.
In CT studies, Iodine-based contrast agents are most often used.
In MRI, gadolinium-based agents are most often used. Here's an example.
When these agents are given intravenously,
they follow the course of the circulatory system.
First returning to the heart,
pumped through the arteries,
delivered to the organs,
returned into the veins,
and eventually are excreted through the urinary system and hepatobiliary system.
We often can take advantage of the cycle by imaging at
different time points such that we capture
the contrast in different anatomical locations.
For example, here's a CT of the abdomen in which we've
captured images of the upper abdomen at four different time points.
Prior to contrast injection,
approximately 20 seconds later when the artery stand out most,
75 seconds later when the liver and the venous system are highlighted,
and finally, at a delayed time point,
which can be useful in diagnosing some diseases accurately.
When exploring datasets in your own projects,
ask yourself whether the images are non-contrasts or post-contrasts,
and if a contrast agent was administered,
which phase the patient was imaged in.
Now let's talk about spatial resolution.
Spatial resolution refers to the ability of
an imaging modality to differentiate two objects.
Let's use the spatial resolution of your visual system as an example.
Imagine yourself standing on a sidewalk,
staring down at a large group of ants.
From your high vantage point,
you can tell that there's a bunch of ants,
but some of them are clustered close together and look like dark blobs moving around.
You then decide to get on your knees and elbows and take a closer look.
You can now distinguish each individual ant in
that former blob and separate them out from their friends.
Similar to the difficulty you would have tried to
distinguish each individual and when viewing them from afar,
some imaging modalities may have two coarse of
a spatial resolution to pick up on the small subtleties required for a diagnosis.
A practical clinical example would be trying
to take a look at the tiny bones of the middle ear.
Here we see two studies obtained from the same patient.
On the left, a maxillofacial CT
optimized to look at the bones of the face, and on the right,
a temporal bone CT,
with a smaller field of view dedicated to
focusing in on the middle ear and inner ear structures.
Note that the right image is not simply a cropped image of the left.
The image parameters were specifically adjusted in
such a way as to focus in on that region.
As we can see, the spatial resolution of the temporal bone CT is
higher and allows us to more distinctly separate the small bones of the middle ear,
as well as delineate the individual structures such as the eardrum,
the facial nerve, and cross-section, etc.
Both spatial and contrast resolution needs to be taken into
account when choosing the appropriate imaging modality for a particular disease.
When exploring your own project ideas,
make sure that the datasets you have access to are
the ideal imaging studies for the given clinical problem you're exploring.
Let's put these concepts together with an example.
Let's revisit the original scout radiograph and CT you saw earlier.
This patient came in with flank pain,
a complaint in which a stone in the urinary system is often the culprit.
So our search begins and we need to take a look for a stone anywhere
from the kidney into the tubing that connects the kidneys and the bladder,
called the ureters, and the bladder itself.
Taking a look at the scalp,
we don't see anything bright to suggest a stone.
Moreover, it's fairly challenging to clearly distinguish the organs themselves.
Now taking a look at the CT images as we scroll from front to back,
we see a bright object here at the base of the bladder and we found our culprit,
the stone that's causing the patient's pain.
Now we'll discuss who uses 3D medical images in day-to-day practice and why.